## Incident Summary
Between the hours of 10am – 12pm on 12/2/2024, multiple users encountered an authorization error when attempting to log in to their accounts. The event was triggered by a misconfiguration of an auth endpoint linked to the application database. A bug in this code caused existing auth tokens to be duplicated, leading to a duplication error that prevented users from being fully authorized after logging in with their credentials. The event was detected by a Grafana dashboard/log tracking failed authorization attempts. The team started working on the event by going over logs and tracing the endpoint calls. This Sev-3 incident affected an unknown number of users.

## Impact
For approximately 2 hours, this error impacted users. As a result, several users were unable to properly complete purchases and gain access to other auth-protected endpoints. Revenue fell from 0.200/min Bitcoin to under 0.100/min during the incident, resulting in substantial financial losses.

## Detection
This incident was detected when an on-call team member was monitoring metric dashboards and logs. An alert was not triggered, as the threshold for failed authentications was set by a hard ceiling and not a ratio. Setting the trigger as a ratio would have allowed for a timelier response and will be implemented in the future.

## Response
After noticing the increase in authentication failures, our team member began tracing relevant logs and metrics in the system. This engineer was not responsible for developing the actual application and had limited knowledge of internal systems outside of DevOps tasks. Combining the dev team with the maintainer team would allow for a more robust response in the future.

## Resolution
We used a sequential approach to resolve the error:
1. Trace all logs and metrics. Note relevant endpoints and error messages.
2. Analyze source code and conduct testing in a dev environment to isolate errors.
3. Write fix and push to production. Monitor for result.

## Timeline
All times are MST.
- **10:04** – First authentication errors begin being logged.
- **10:12** – Engineer notices uptick in authentication failures.
- **10:15** – Error logs begin being traced.
- **10:30** – Relevant information identified, and source code analysis begins.
- **11:30** – `setAuth()` method identified as a potential issue when duplicating tokens.
- **11:35** – Method changed to make multiple token insertion attempts. Change pushed.
- **11:40** – Error still observed.
- **11:55** – `setAuth()` updated to logout existing user before attempting a secondary login.
- **12:00** – Incident appears to be resolved. Auth failures drop to acceptable levels.

## Root Cause
1. The application had an auth failure because the database blocked duplicate logins.
2. The database blocked duplicate logins because the auth was set as a primary key.
3. Because we did not account for users staying logged in and attempting another login.
4. Because the application was not sufficiently tested before being pushed to prod.
5. Because best development practices were ignored.

The final root cause was a lack of adequate testing. Testing was only implemented after the final product had been completed. Simple unit testing during the dev process could have prevented this problem from making it into a production environment. In the future, all changes should be thoroughly tested first by the developing engineer.

Additionally, a code review process integrated into the pipeline will allow for more eyes on the code before prod. No code should be pushed without both the source code and test code being reviewed by at least two other developers.

## Backlog Check
No specific items in the backlog could have prevented this incident.

## Lessons Learned/Prevention
- Need more unit/integration tests to completely cover edge cases.
- More than one engineer should review all source code to identify further bugs.
- Alerts should be triggered based on ratios and not hard ceilings.

## Action Items
- More tests to be written.
- More robust authentication methods need to be implemented.
- Correct all alerts to trigger based on ratios.
- Change log reporting to be more readable.
